Welcome to the session on regular expressions
and the grep command.
Pattern matching is what we would be discussing
in this session.
We will go through detailed demonstrations
for you to understand the grep command thoroughly.
Once you understand the concept of regular
expressions, you can use the grep command
to its full extent, once you understand the
regular expressions, you can make the most
out of the grep command and use the command
line in a very powerful manner.
We will be discussing the grep command using
the regular expressions that conform to the
POSIX standard.
There are many engines in different languages
and tools that implement regular expressions
with various options, but we would stick to
the IEEE 1003.1 hyphen 2001, POSIX standard
which defines the regular expressions to be
of two different types, the one the basic
and the extended, and we will limit our discussions
to these two varieties.
So, what is regular expression?
It is basically a pattern template to filter
text.
So, as you have seen in the command line,
some of the commands will give a lot of output
and we would like to filter and extract certain
features from that output.
So, you would pipe the output of the command
to grep command and then use a regular expression
to pick the pattern that you are interested
in.
So, this is the basic utility that we would
be focusing on.
However, you could also combine the grep command
with any other command to extract the output
in a format that you are interested in.
And there are two types of regular expression
engines, the BRE, which corresponds to the
POSIX basic regular expression engine and
the ERE which corresponds to POSIX extended
regular expression engine.
And the options for these two engines are
slightly different and there are some common
options as well.
So we will look at them and use the grep command
to use either BRE or ERE depending upon our
requirement.
So, why do we need to learn regular expression
at all?
In many languages like Java, Perl, Python,
Ruby and so on, in many of the scripting languages
you would require to process the input from
the user or perform some string operations.
So, regular expressions are what are used
to perform these operations without being
tied down to the actual value of the string
so that the program is generic in nature.
So, if you learn regular expressions, you
can make the most out of the string manipulations
in multiple languages.
And there are many tools in Linux, such as
the grep, the sed and the awk, which actually
allow you to make use of those language features
to a larger extent, if you have understood
regular expressions.
There are also other independent applications
such as the databases such as MySQL or PostgreSQL,
which actually allow you to also take utility
of the regular expressions, because they are
used to process strings in those languages
as well.
A typical usage of the grep command is basically
to supply a file name so that each line in
the file is processed using the grep command
using the pattern that is provided as an option
to the grep command.
You could also launch the grep command to
take input from a pipe.
So, you could have a command the output can
be piped to grep and then you provide the
pattern and every line in the output would
be processed by the grep command using the
pattern that you have supplied.
Now, remember that the grep command operates
line after line, which is a very common feature
among many utilities on Linux.
Now, by default, if you launch the command
grep, it would use the basic regular expression
engine.
But if you want to use the extended set, then
either you can use the command egrep or you
could also give the option minus capital E
to the grep command and then the pattern will
be interpreted within the options that are
available and extended under the extended
regular expression engine.
Now, there are some special characters with
their meaning which we must understand.
So, these are not necessarily the same as
what are used by the shell to interpret when
you write a command.
And the way you can escape the special character
interpretation by the shell and allow only
the grep to interpret it as a part of the
pattern is to enclose the pattern in single
quotes and that would actually be very safe
option.
So, there are some grep commands where these
single quotes are not necessary, but we will
make it a habit so that we do not make a mistake
later on where there is a conflict between
the interpretation of a special character
between the grep command and the shell which
is passing on the options to the grep command.
The dot is used to match any single character
except the null character which comes at the
end of a string or the newline character which
comes at the end of a line.
Star is usually used in shell commands to
interpret as many options for the files as
possible.
But in the case of grep, it is to match either
0 or more of the preceding character.
So, if you have a character followed by star,
then that character preceding the star would
be matched with either 0 or more occurrences.
And this can also be used along with an expression.
So, any sub-expression, any sub-regular expression
can be used with the star operator.
The square brackets are used to give a list
of characters any one of them can match the
string.
And if you have a hyphen between two characters
in the square brackets, it indicates a range.
So the collating sequence of characters which
is ANSI in the case of most of the installations,
then you will actually see that A to Z or
capital A to capital Z, or 0 to 1 can be used
as ranges within this square bracket.
You could also use a reduced range if it is
required for you.
The hat character is used to indicate as an
anchor for the beginning of the line.
That means that the pattern which follows
after the anchor will be matched only if it
is occurring at the beginning of the line.
And if the hat character occurs within the
square brackets, it indicates that the list
of characters in the square brackets should
not be matched.
It is like an opposite effect of the range
that is provided in the square brackets.
The dollar is an anchor to indicate that the
matching of the button should be at the end
of the line.
And the backslash as usually also used in
the shell, it is to escape special characters
and you can escape the backslash itself by
providing it twice.
Now, there are ranges of occurrences for the
patterns that you can also indicate.
That is there is a pattern which you would
like to have it either 2 times or not more
than 4 times by giving 2 comma 4 as options
within the braces.
And in the case of a BRE, the braces should
be preceded by the backslashes.
And in the case of the extended regular expression
sector, the braces need not be preceded with
a backslash.
Similarly, parenthesis can be used to group
regular expressions.
By grouping what we mean is that it can be
followed with either the range of occurrences
or the star operator, so that you can actually
have a more complicated matching pattern.
Now, the parentheses do not require a preceding
backslash in the case of ERE, but the function
is the same.
And there are also more options in ERE.
The plus sign would indicate that the preceding
character should be matched either once or
more.
And the question mark sign is to indicate
the preceding character should be matched
either 0 times or once.
And the pipe character is used within the
parentheses to indicate a logical OR operator
over the patterns that are provided, but patterns
need to be of the same length.
And the plus question mark can be used also
with sub-expressions and not necessarily only
a single character.
To make life easy, there are certain character
classes that are defined so that you could
match those character classes without having
to specify the range of those characters.
So, any printable character can be matched
by using colon print colon as the option for
the character range.
All the character classes have to be provided
as options within the pattern using the double
pair of square brackets.
The first pair of square brackets is for the
character enclosure and the second pair is
to indicate the specific character class.
So, which means that you could also insert
other characters that has to go along with
the character classes by giving, let us say,
an underscore or something else between the
two closing or opening square brackets and
there are many character classes that are
defined with a wide variety that could be
of use for you, the alphanumeric or alphabetic
characters either lowercase or uppercase,
decimal digits, character classes that match
a space or a tab or a whitespace or a punctuation
mark and so on.
So, it is up to us to imagine how we can put
these to good use so that the script that
we write is as concise as possible.
Now, when we have any grouping that is done
using the parenthesis then such a match would
also be possible to be referred and the back
references are available in 9 different ways.
So, there are 9 variables; slash backslash
1 all the way up to backslash 9.
And for example here it is given hello is
enclosed within the parenthesis for the BRE
and you will see that the pattern would match
hello occurring twice because whatever is
matched within the parenthesis is then going
to be matched again using backslash 1 and
between them there is a dot star which indicates
that it can have any number of characters
between these two occurrences of hello.
So, in other words, this pattern would match
a line that would contain two occurrences
of hello in between them any arbitrary number
of characters can come.
So, this is a very useful feature also for
replacement of a matched pattern which we
will learn as an application of grep later
on when we write the shell scripts, but for
now it will be used to repeat whatever was
matched within the same line.
Now, there is an operator sequence just like
any other arithmetic operation sequences in
languages, programming languages.
So, the highest preference is used for character
collation, and then the meta characters which
are escaped using the backslash and then comes
the bracket expansion and after that the sub-expressions
which are enclosed using the parenthesis and
then the back references used for those patterns
which are matched by this parenthesis.
And then comes the star character to indicate
0 or more matches of the preceding character
or preceding sub-expression, and then the
repetition of this particular sub-expression
using the braces which are indicated with
a backslash for BRE and without the backslash
for ERE, and then comes a concatenation, and
in the end, the lowest preference would be
for the anchors which is for the beginning
or the end of the line.
The operator precedence is very similar for
the extended regular expressions also, except
for that you have the bracket expansion and
grouping are done without the preceding backslash.
And in addition, there is also an alternation
operator pipe that is available which is having
the lowest preference.
So, now, let us go ahead and try these various
options using the terminal and understand
how the regular expressions help us in making
use of the grep command to its fullest extent.
Let us get started with the grep command.
So, to make our work simpler, I have created
a text file in which there are some lines
of text which you would like to filter.
So, here is the name, list that I have created,
it is the hypothetical list of roll numbers
and the names of students and the pattern
of the roll number is similar to what is followed
in IIT Madras for the undergraduate and postgraduate
students and the names are given with different
formats with and without the initials in middle
and let us see how we can pick various lines
from this particular file by looking at patterns.
So, if you were to look for a particular string
that could not be quite easy, you could do
it either using the grep command.
So, grep Raman names dot text would pick only
the line that would have the string that is
provided Raman which is matching, and you
could also provide this particular string
that has to be matched within single quotes
which is actually a good habit to follow.
Now, what has been matched would also be shown
in a different color on the terminal if you
have enabled the terminal colors.
You could now also look for any other pattern.
Let us say you look for the pattern Anu and
you would see that it would match two lines
one where Anu is occurring as a single word
and where Anu is occurring as a part of a
word Anupama.
So, let us look at this usage.
You could also reduce the number of characters
and you would see that if you were to look
at Sa, capital S and small a, then it would
match two lines where Sa is occurring at the
beginning of those words because S is given
as a capital letter, and you provide ai as
the string and you would see that it would
match to other lines where ai is occurring
as part of those words.
Now, this kind of a string matching is the
very first usage of grep and it is quite convenient.
You could do it also using a cat command where
the output of the cat command can be passed
on to grep using a pipe, which we have seen
in the past.
Let us do that here.
So, cat names dot txt pipe grep and then ai,
and then after that, you do not have to provide
any other option because the input is not
in a file, but it is coming from the pipe
already.
So, you could see that that would work quite
nicely.
Now, this feature can also be used to process
the output coming from commands so that you
can pick up lines containing a particular
string.
Now, let us look at the usage of dot in the
grep command.
So, we would have cat names dot text grep
and within the single quotes I would give
the pattern.
So, I would reuse this particular string again
and again.
Let us say I gave a capital S dot n, which
means that I would like to match a string
which contains capital S after that any other
character followed by n.
And you will see that it match both Singh
and Sankaran, because Sin and San would be
matched, i and a are the ones which are taking
the position of the dot.
Now, this dot can also be in the beginning
or at the end of the string.
So, if you put dot am as the string, then
you would see that the kam will be matched,
ram will be matched yam and pam.
So, dot am would match when the dot is replaced
with any of the characters that is available.
Now, some of these are to be at the end of
a line.
So, I would like to see whether there is a
name that would end with am.
So, for that, you have to indicate that it
should be with an anchor dollar.
And you would see that only those matching
with the end of the line would be shown on
the screen.
Now, if you look at the output you see that
there is a dot here after the M and I would
like to match that, so that means I want to
pick up names of people who have an initial
available in their names, and you cannot actually
use the dot directly, you have to escape it.
So, let us try that out, cat names grep and
then backslash dot.
So, it would now look for a dot in the name
and then print.
So, there are two names with dot and those
will be printed for you.
And of course, if you want the dot to be necessarily
after a character so that it is an abbreviation
for their middle name or an initial then you
can put one more dot, so the interpretation
would be that the first dot is matching the
initial and/or the abbreviation of the middle
name, the second dot is the dot itself which
has been escaped.
So, in the first matching, if you see, you
have not provided the initial or the abbreviation,
so the matching was happening only for the
dot and not for the abbreviation.
So, in the second case, the abbreviation is
being matched with this dot that has been
provided.
Now, you could also match strings using the
anchors at the beginning.
So, let us say at the beginning I would like
to have a capital M and you would see that
among the various lines the ones which are
corresponding to a roll number that looks
like capital MM or capital ME, these two lines
have been matched.
So, you can see that this line and this line
are matched because the beginning is with
a capital M.
And you could also do that with the other
characters and in this case all the beginning
of the lines is with the capital character
so that would be fine.
And if you want to give a small character
that would not work, but you can ask grep
to do a case insensitive matching and then
that would work by giving you the patterns
that match with the e in the beginning without
looking at whether it is capital or small.
Now, there is a concept of word boundary that
we would like to look at.
So, you see that the end of the words are
available as an, so, or am.
So, let us look at the am character.
So, you see that the am is matching both as
a part of a name, like in Raman Singh, as
Anupama, but it is also matching as a end
of the word as in Manickam and Sagayam.
So, let us say I want to pick only those lines
which are having the am at the end of the
word.
So, of course, in this case, it is also matching
the end of the line, but you could also use
the concept of a word boundary.
So, slash b is for the word boundary.
And you would see that it would match with
the word boundary with the end of the line.
Now, it is also matching with the end of the
line by a dollar anchor so both would give
you the same output.
But the difference would occur if you were
to have an, then you will see that here, so
if I look at an and then the word boundary,
so Raman Singh is also getting matched, whereas
Sankaran also is getting matched.
Raman Singh is matched because it is occurring
as a word boundary, Sankaran is occurring
both as a word boundary as well as the end
of the line.
And the difference will be illustrated if
you put an anchor here with a dollar, I would
match only Sankaran because Raman, the ending
an is not at the end of the line, but it has
only a word boundary.
So, the choice of the word boundary with a
slash b or a dollar as the end of the line
is up to you to pick depending upon the situation.
Now, let us look at the use of square brackets.
So, the square brackets are essentially to
give options.
So, let us say I want to give the options
of two characters M followed by either M or
E and you will see that the roll numbers MM
and ME will be shown.
So, if you see the first M is matched with
the first M here, the second character is
matched to be either an M or an E. So, you
could also now look at it as E followed by
either E or a D and you would see that ED
and EE both are matched.
So, the second character there is basically
an option that is being made available.
So, now, let us see whether that can be used
in a nice manner.
So, you could actually see that in the first
character, I can choose either M or an E and
the second character can be E. So, it would
match either ME or EE, and you can see that
the roll numbers are given in the same way.
So, the matching pattern is shown in red color
text, which is easy for you to identify.
Now, this can be used also with the other
parts of the string.
So, let us try that out.
So, I want to match anything that starts with
an S and ends with either an m or an n.
So, you see that Singh and then Sagayam and
Sankaran all of them are matched.
Now, you see that the second line is matching
with an S that is coming as a part of the
roll number, but let us say our intention
was to match it only in the name, but not
in the roll number and we know that the roll
number and the name have been separated by
a space, and therefore, there is a word boundary
that is involved there.
So, we could go ahead and try to introduce
a word boundary before S so that the interpretation
is that after a word boundary there should
be a word that starts with S and then any
number of characters followed by either an
m or an n.
And you see that now the matching is happening
with the second line not with the roll number
but with the Sagayam that is actually the
word in the end.
So, the amount of matching that is done is
only for the last word but not for the one
starting with the roll number.
Now, why is this useful, because whatever
is matched can be placed in a back reference
variable which we have already seen in the
lectures and that is something that we could
actually be making use of.
Now, the square bracket can be used to also
be giving us an options of characters that
can be matched.
So, let us match let us say vowels.
So, aeiou is a vowel and let us see what are
all the strings that match vowel containing
them and you would see that all names would
usually have a vowel so that would be matched.
But let us say we would like to match those
names that contain two vowels side by side.
So for that I would give the pattern like
this.
So, it is going to be matching two characters
because there are two pairs of square brackets
side by side.
The first pair contains option of characters
that is listed which is vowels and the second
also contains the same set of vowels.
And you see that it could match two names
where they are two vowels side by side ai
as in Umair and Jain.
Hyphen can be used within the square brackets
to indicate a range of characters.
So, let us also try that out.
So, look at the roll numbers, they contain
a sequence.
So, I would have 9 0 and then from 1 to 7
the roll numbers are starting.
So, I would like to give a range there.
I would like to have only 1 to 4 roll numbers
to be considered.
So, now you see that the first four rows are
being shown.
So, which means that the pattern that is matched
is B90 and then the fourth character can be
either 1 or 2 or 3 or 4.
So, I am not listing all of them, I am just
giving a range.
Now, I could modify the range to let us say
5 to 7, and you see that the remaining ones
are being shown.
And I could also give it as 1 to 9, and then
all the names are shown, of course, 8 and
9 are not there, but that does not matter,
because if any pattern does not match, then
that is anyway being ignored.
Now, this is definitely much more simpler
than let us say providing 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7 which would be also the same output.
So, naturally, if there is any sequence of
characters that could also be reduced using
a hyphen, then we should go ahead and use
that feature.
Now, let us try this out using the names also.
So, I would go by looking at those names which
would have the first character in the second
half of the alphabet and then followed by
vowel.
And you would see that Mary Manickam, Raman
etc. are coming, but Anu and Anupama are not
coming, because their first character comes
in the first half of the alphabet.
If you have a hat inside the square brackets,
it is implying that there is a negation of
the pattern.
So, let us go ahead and try that out.
So, here, if you see, 5 to 7, and I am going
to negate that, so that means that the character
that follows B90 should not be either 5 or
6 or 7.
So, you see that it is then giving the remaining
of the lines.
So, the hat inside the square brackets is
to negate the range of characters that is
provided within these square brackets.
Now, let us use in the BRE system where using
the grep command we could provide the number
of times a particular character can occur.
So, let us say the M should occur twice.
So, exactly twice should it should occur.
And you see that MM is being matched.
Now, if you say that it should occur either
once or twice, then you see that ME is matching
M dot is also matching.
So, you could see that you could specify exactly
how many times it has to be matched side by
side by using the braces and in BRE the braces
have to be preceded by the backslash.
So, you can see that the braces are preceded
by a backslash.
And then the number that is between the braces
is the number of times the preceding character
has to be matched.
And here when you say only one number, it
means exactly that many types of matching
is to be required.
And when you give a range of numbers like
1 comma 2, that means it should be matched
at least once but not more than 2 times including
2 times.
So, let us try another feature let us say
E and then at least once or at most two times
and you will see that it would match ED as
well as ME because all of them would actually
have the matching either once or twice.
Now, you could also group the patterns that
are being matched.
So, let us look at that now.
So, the grouping is done by using parenthesis
which are also to be preceded by a backslash
in the case of BRE.
So, let us do like that.
So, ma is a string and we are just grouping
it.
And when you just do it, it is no different
from just matching it ma, but our idea was
to see if I can match it once more.
So, I would like to match it once more with
any other character between them.
So that means that I would like to have two
occurrences of ma within the same line.
And you will see that what is the line that
I am going to pick up, I am going to pick
up Umair Ahmad there.
So, you could see that it comes up.
So, you can see that ma is matched with this
ma.
And then ir blank ah is being matched with
the dot star and then again one more ma is
coming because we have matched that with the
first group which is ma.
So, backslash 1 means first group which has
been given in parenthesis and backslash 1
refers to the back reference of the matched
pattern that has been provided before.
So, this is a very neat way by seeing that
what has to be matched.
So, now, it also means that this ma need not
be provided as it is.
We could also say a character followed by
a should be repeated once more.
So, whatever is character that is following
a should be repeated and you see that here
capital M is also getting matched because
in Mary Manickam capital M is coming before
a, and in the case of Umair Ahmad small m
is coming before a.
So, we are able to catch both of them and
this dot is matching either the capital M
or small m, but whatever is matched that is
being repeated a second time by use of backslash
1.
Now, you could also do that with a dot to
see what happens if you are going to match
an occurrence that is following a coming twice.
So, Sankaran is having one name where n is
followed by a and you can see that it is coming
second time again towards the end of the word,
so an, an.
So, the first an is getting matched, the dot
is the n here and after the first an, kar
is getting matched by the dot star here and
after that an is getting matched again by
back reference here.
So, the n that is matched in the dot is getting
reflected also in the backslash 1.
Now, let us say if I want that to be appearing
three times that also can be looked up.
So, you could also use this pattern to see
how many times it has to be matched.
So, here I am using the braces to tell how
many times I want that particular pattern
to be matched.
So, in the past, we have used it for a character,
but here we are using for the pattern.
So, you see that the Sagayam is coming because
agayam, so the pattern called a and dot is
coming three times and it is coming because
here we have put a and then dot as a group
and that group called a and character after
that is to be repeated three times and that
is coming here.
Now, if it is to be repeated two times, then
you see Raman will come because am, an, then
Anupama will come because am a blank and then
Sankaran also will come because it is ar and
an.
So, you could see that the parenthesis can
be used to group character or a sub-expression
and then after that, you can either back reference
it for one more matching or you could also
provide the braces to tell how many times
you would like to have it matched.
Now, if you want to get it matched either
two times or three times that also is possible
for you to say and you will see that two that
will be listed with a union of these two outputs
that we have seen.
The extended regular expression engine can
be used while running the command grep either
by using an option capital E or by running
the command as egrep.
So, let us look at that possibility.
Now, the patterns that you can use in extended
regular expression engine are slightly more,
so plus is one such character.
So, by plus we mean it should be matched either
once or more number of times.
So, I would like to say M followed by a plus
that means M can occur either once or more
number of times.
So, you would see that it would match in lines
where M is occurring either once or twice.
Now, I can also put a hat in front of it to
say that this kind of matching should occur
only in the beginning of the line.
And you would see that both MM and ME will
occur because in ME case it is matching once
and in MM case it is matching twice.
The plus will indicate that it should match
either once or more number of times, not 0.
Star would actually occur for 0.
So, you would see that when you put a star
there, so it would occur 0, which means that
other lines which do not have M are also getting
matched.
Now, what is the purpose of those lines?
Well, when you put something else after the
star, then it would actually make a sense.
So, you would see that after capital M, I
would, let us say, put an a there without
the hat and you would see here.
So, you would see that M can be matched with
Ma or it could also be just na itself, because
anything that is in front of a can also be
matched either M or not.
So, there are situations where one has to
watch when star is used.
So, star does not mean any number of characters
or any number of characters it should be dot.
So, when you put a dot there, now the dot
is actually being operated upon by star to
indicate any number of characters and now
you see that definitely M has to occur following
that the any number of characters can come
and after that an a has to come.
So, you can see that here the M is starting,
after that any number of characters have been
matched and then there is an a.
So, here also M is matching, after that any
number of characters and then a.
And here also M is there after that any number
of characters and then a.
So, M dot star a is more close to what we
would interpret based upon our experience
with the shell, where star indicates any number
of matches, but this is actually something
that you have to watch.
The star is operating on M which means that
either M can be present or not and therefore
you could see that even when M is not present
before a, those strings are also getting matched.
So, watch out for the interpretation of star.
Now, let us use the other features of ERE.
So, apart from plus, you could also have other
features.
You can also group the characters and then
use a plus.
So, let us say I would have a group called
ma and then after that I would put a plus,
which means that the pair of characters ma
can occur either once or twice.
So, you could see that Raman Singh, Umair
Ahmad will come because they are all occurring
once in those particular patterns.
And the difference with respect to star also
will be evident because it would match even
those situations where the pattern ma is not
occurring.
Now, we would also explore the use of a pipe
as an alternation between two patterns of
strings that will be matched.
So, I would like to match, let us say, in
the beginning either ED should be there or
ME should be there.
The mechanical or engineering design both
are very close by.
So, I would like to match these two sets of
students.
So, you would see that those two are being
matched.
And you could also have names that can be
matched with the different lengths also.
So, I may want to have, let us say, Anu should
be matched or Raman should be matched and
that would also work quite fine.
So, the length of the strings that are coming
on either sides of the pipe need not be same.
And let us put am and an and you will see
that the pattern is matching.
Those who have the two characters in their
names, either am or an.
Now, you could combine this with other things
also.
For example, you can combine with the anchor
of dollar and you see that those who have
either an am or an in the end are getting
matched.
The dollar is indicating that it should be
done at the end of the line.